=============================================================================
                                  Iniphile
=============================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Ini file parsing library for C++
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

:Author: Roman Neuhauser
:Contact: neuhauser@sigpipe.cz
:Copyright: This document is in the public domain.

.. this file is marked up using reStructuredText
   lines beginning with ".." are reST directives
   "foo_" or "`foo bar`_" is a link, defined at ".. _foo" or ".. _foo bar"
   "::" introduces a literal block (usually some form of code)
   "`foo`" is some kind of identifier
   suspicious backslashes in the text ("`std::string`\s") are required for
   reST to recognize the preceding character as syntax

.. contents::

Introduction
============

Iniphile is a C++ library and commandline tool for parsing a dialect
of the INI file format.

Prerequisities
++++++++++++++

Iniphile is known to build and run on FreeBSD 9 with gcc >= 4.2.1, and on
Windows Vista with gcc >= 4.6.2 and Windows 7 with Visual Studio 2008 (vc9).

The library uses a few header-only Boost_ libraries in both its interface and
implementation.  The interface mentions Boost.Optional_ and Boost.Variant_,
The most prominent implementation detail is Boost.Spirit_, specifically v2.1
(Boost_ 1.41) or higher.  Unit tests require Boost.Test_ to compile and run.

.. important::

  For now, Iniphile supports linking only against Boost libraries built
  with ``--layout=system``, ``-DBOOST_ALL_NO_LIB`` is used unconditionally.
  This means that if your Boost libraries have funny names like
  `boost_regex-vc90-mt-1_45.dll`, linking the test executables will fail.
  The Iniphile *library* depends on header-only Boost libraries and the
  linker failure does not affect it.  You just won't be able to run its
  unit tests.

.. _Boost: http://boost.org/

.. _Boost.Optional:
    http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_42_0/libs/optional/index.html
.. _Boost.Variant:
    http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_42_0/libs/variant/index.html

.. _Boost.Spirit:
    http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_42_0/libs/spirit/index.html
.. _Boost.Test:
    http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_42_0/libs/test/index.html


Example
=======

notify.ini ::

  [notify]
  enabled   = No
  addresses = alice@example.com
              bob@example.com
              chris@example.com

notify.cpp ::

  #include <iostream>
  #include <sstream>
  #include <fstream>
  #include <string>

  #include "input.hpp"
  #include "ast.hpp"
  #include "output.hpp"

  bool
  notify(std::vector<std::string> const& addrs)
  {
      // whatever
  }

  int
  main()
  {
      namespace ini = iniphile;

      std::ifstream input("notify.ini");
      std::ostringstream diag;

      ini::parse_result cfg(ini::parse(input, diag));

      if (!cfg) {
          std::cerr << "garbled configuration\n";
          return EXIT_FAILURE;
      }

      ini::ast::node afg(ini::normalize(*cfg));

      typedef std::vector<std::string> values;

      bool enabled  = ini::get(afg, "notify.enabled", false);
      long attempts = ini::get(afg, "notify.attempts", 3L);
      values addrs  = ini::get(afg, "notify.addresses", values());

      while (enabled && attempts--) {
          if (notify(addrs))
              return EXIT_SUCCESS;
      }
      return EXIT_FAILURE;
  }


Reference
=========

INI file syntax
+++++++++++++++

There's no standard definition of INI file syntax and semantics.  The ABNF_
grammar below approximates the dialect supported by this library (only
*significant* whitespace is part of the grammar).  See the following prose
for clarifications).

.. _ABNF: http://tools.ietf.org/html/std68

::

  inifile      =  *section
                  EOF
  section      =  *comentline
                  headerline
                  sectionbody
  headerline   =  "[" sectionname "]" comment
  sectionname  =  1*LCHAR
                  ; except "]"
  sectionbody  =  *(assignment / comment)
  assignment   =  optname "=" optval
  optname      =  1*VCHAR
                  ; except "="
  optval       =  ovlinefirst
                  *ovlinecont
  ovlinefirst  =  [ovline] comment
  ovlinecont   =  1*WSP ovline comment
  ovline       =  *optvalpart
  optvalpart   =  qstring / bareword
  qstring      =  DQUOTE *CHAR DQUOTE
  bareword     =  1*VCHAR
                  ; except ";"
  comment      =  *1(";" *LCHAR) EOL
  EOL          =  CRLF / CR /  LF
  LCHAR        =  VCHAR / WSP

An `inifile` is a flat, possibly empty, collection of `section`\s.  A
`section` begins at a `headerline` and continues until the next `headerline`
or `EOF`, whichever comes first.  Each `section` contains zero or more
`assignment`\s, `optname`/`optval` pairs.  Whitespace allowed around the "=".
`optname` must begin at the start of a line.  `optval` is a list of strings
(`optvalpart`, either a `qstring` or a `bareword`) separated by whitespace.
It may span multiple lines: continuation lines begin with horizontal
whitespace, and `qstring`\s may also contain newlines.

Commandline tool
++++++++++++++++

The tool is documented in an accompanying man page, iniphile(1).

Library
+++++++

Header Organization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each header `#include`\s all its dependencies.

* metagram.hpp ::

    typedef unspecified iniphile::config;

* input.hpp ::

    #include <boost/optional.hpp>

    typedef boost::optional<iniphile::config> parse_result;

    iniphile::parse_result
    iniphile::parse(
        std::string const& input
      , std::ostream& diag
    );

    iniphile::parse_result
    iniphile::parse(
        std::istream& input
      , std::ostream& diag
    );

* astfwd.hpp ::

    #include <boost/variant.hpp>

    typedef std::vector<std::string> iniphile::valpath;

    valpath
    to_valpath(std::string const & path);

    typedef unspecified iniphile::ast::node;

* ast.hpp ::

    #include "astfwd.hpp"

    iniphile::ast::node
    iniphile::normalize(iniphile::config const & cst);

* output.hpp ::

    template<class T>
    T
    iniphile::get(
        iniphile::ast::node const& cfg
      , iniphile::valpath const& path
      , T dflt
    );

    template<class T>
    T
    iniphile::get(
        iniphile::ast::node const& cfg
      , std::string const& path
      , T dflt
    );

T get<T>(ast::node, std::string, T)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The library defines these specializations:

* `std::vector<std::string>`

  One `optvalpart` per `std::string`.
  `DQUOTE`\s from `qstrings` are not maintained.

* `std::string`

  The whole `optval` with whitespace between `optvalpart`\s normalized to
  single spaces.
  `DQUOTE`\s from `qstrings` are maintained.

* `bool`

  The first `optvalpart` interpreted as a bool according to these rules: ::

    true  <= "1" / "true"  / "yes" / "on"  ; case insensitive
    false <= "0" / "false" / "no"  / "off" ; case insensitive

* `long`

  The first `optvalpart` interpreted as a long using the
  `boost::spirit::qi::long_`_ parser (decimal representation with optional
  leading sign).

* `double`

  The first `optvalpart` interpreted as a double using the
  `boost::spirit::qi::double_`_ parser (decimal representation of ints and
  doubles, scientific representation (nnn.fff.Eeee) of doubles.

.. _boost::spirit::qi::double_:
.. _boost::spirit::qi::long_:
.. _boost::spirit::qi::numeric:
   http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_41_0/libs/spirit/doc/html/spirit/qi/reference/numeric.html

Downloads
=========

Repository
++++++++++

The latest source can be checked out from the Mercurial_ repository_.

.. _Mercurial: http://selenic.com/mercurial/
.. _repository: https://hg.sigpipe.cz/

Official tarballs
+++++++++++++++++

All Iniphile releases can be found in the `download directory`_.

.. _download directory: http://codex.sigpipe.cz/iniphile/dist/

Build and Installation
======================

Iniphile is distributed with a set of Makefiles suitable for several
environments.  Currently supported are: FreeBSD make and GNU make with the
GNU C++ compiler, MSVC nmake with the Microsoft compiler.

Let `$make` be your make command, and let `$env` be `bsd`, `gnu` or `msvc`
as appropriate.  Then

``$make -f $env.mk libs`` (requires Boost.Spirit_)
  creates a static library and a dll plus import library

``$make -f $env.mk check`` (requires Boost.Test_)
  creates the libraries and runs their unit tests

Unix
++++

Main variables and their default values:

`CXX`:
  ``g++$(GCCVER)``
`GCCVER`:
  ``<empty>``
`PREFIX`:
  ``/usr/local``
`LIBDIR`:
  ``$(PREFIX)/lib``
`INCDIR`:
  ``$(PREFIX)/include``
`PKGCONFIGDIR`:
  ``$(LIBDIR)/pkgconfig``
`_BOOST`:
  ``$(PREFIX)``
`SPIRIT`:
  ``$(_BOOST)/include``
`UTFINC`:
  ``$(_BOOST)/include``
`UTFLIB`:
  ``$(_BOOST)/lib``
`UTFRUN`:
  ``$(UTFLIB)``

FreeBSD
~~~~~~~
::

  gmake -f gnu.mk <targets-and-variables>

pkg-config files are stored in a nonstandard path on this system.  If you
install into `/usr/local`, make sure to do so with
`PKGCONFIGDIR=/usr/local/libdata/pkgconfig`.

GNU/Linux (or other with the GNU toolchain)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
::

  make -f gnu.mk <targets-and-variables>

`gnu.mk` assumes the GNU gcc suite.

Windows
+++++++

Main variables and their default values:

`PREFIX`:
  ``.\stage``
`INCDIR`
  ``$(PREFIX)\include``
`LIBDIR`
  ``$(PREFIX)\lib``
`BOOST_INCDIR`:
  ``<empty>``
`BOOST_LIBDIR`:
  ``<empty>``

`msvc.mk` assumes and relies on tools provided with MS Visual C++ Express
exclusively.  It's tested on Windows Vista and 7 with VC++ 2008/9.0 Express,
and works in the Visual Studio Command Prompt and the Windows SDK CMD Shell.
::

  nmake -f msvc.mk <targets-and-variables>

No attempt to guess or find the Boost prerequisities is made, you must
supply `BOOST_INCDIR` and `BOOST_LIBDIR` or the compilation will fail.

``nmake -f msvc.mk install`` puts built libraries in ``$(LIBDIR)``
(defaults to ``$(PREFIX)\lib``) and header files in ``$(INCDIR)``
(defaults to ``$(PREFIX)\include``).

.. target-notes::
.. section-numbering::

.. vim: ft=rst sts=2 sw=2 tw=77
